Non-Linear Growth
===
More and more I feel like it is necessary to keep the concept of non-linear growth in your mind as you navigate the world, and particularly, as you interact with others.
## Your Life is Not a Timeline
You are the sum total of your life experiences, but that life could have taken many different paths. That is to say; a human life is non-linear. There is no prescribed order that a person must grow in. This is the main reason our educational system is so hard to reform; we want there to be an ideal order that fits everyone, which doesn’t exist. It can also lead to misunderstandings, when we assume that the people with live, work, and speak with have lived a similar life as us.

## Child Development
I really first began to appreciate this fact after becoming a father, while going back to school. I noticed that in the same way my daughter and her peers all seemed to be learn different skills from each other, I seemed to know more, and sometimes quite a bit less, about certain subjects than my fellow students. You could take any two children, or adults, and compare them along a single metric and one would seem to be more advanced than the other. But simply change the metric and the order could easily swap. And age doesn’t seem to be the only factor, but the fact is: the skills you learn are not a checklist that you work your way down on, its an open field that you wonder through, learning with each step something new.

And while you can take the sum total of your life a lay it out in chronological order, that doesn’t mean you had to proceed in that order.
## Learning is “Bushy”
Think of your life like a tree. You might at first say that Trees grow upward. But that would be to dismiss nearly half of the anatomy of a tree. While the branches are growing upward, the roots are growing down, and the trunk is growing out. And each is vital for the health of the tree. Not enough roots and the branches' growth will be stunted, not enough leaves and the roots' growth will be stunted.

You, like the tree, must grow in many directions to lead a health life.
## There are No Bad Directions
I was raised in a Christian home; we went to church every Sunday, prayed before meals, I joined the youth group and my whole social network were members of my church. As I *grew* more independent of my parents social circle and started making my own friends at school, and then work, I *grew* more atheist. Now, I know of several cases where people have *grown* in the opposite direction. Being raised in a secular home, and *growing* more religious. You can not *grow* in a good or bad direction, as long as you are growing, you are living a proper life.
## You Are Allowed to Disagree
My whole life I have been a very critical and argumentative person. If I disagree with a point of view you have voiced, you will know. But, disagreeing with your ideals or opinions, doesn’t mean I hate you or even dislike you. In fact as a result of this fairly strong personality trait, *only* the people willing to argue with me remain my friends. I argue with every single loved on in my life. We agree on many things as well, but I often can’t help but take the opposing view, even when I sometimes agree with them on a basic level.

If you learn to separate your commitment to your own point of view from your opinion of your peers, then your can learn to disagree with someone without loosing respect for them. Remember, every person that you have ever respected has been wrong on something at one point in their life. And those who were most worthy of that respect know it.
## Your Life is an Evolution
When you start to get into the mechanics of the Theory of Evolution you learn that the evolution of a species is not a linear track, going from less complex to more complex. If that were the case there would be no, microbes, no fish, no rodents, no monkeys, we would all just be various forms of humanoids. Every species still alive today is on the same evolutionary rung as us. Most of them never developed speech or tool-making but that doesn’t make them more primitive, they just specialized in a different niche optimizing on speed, smell, strength, size etc.

In the same way, there will be many people you meet that aren't as educated, or athletic, or creative, and many that will be more so. But that doesn’t make them superior or inferior, you’ve just specialized in different skills. Now, there are species that go extinct, or become endangered. But once again this is not a sign of inferiority, but incompatibility. Sometimes their environment has changed so that their skills are no longer useful, or they have migrated to such an environment, and or sometimes they are hunted out of, or to the brink of existence. Whatever the case, their ability to survive, will depend on their ability to adapt, to **grow**.
## Atrophy is the Enemy
The only thing that can be considered objectively bad is atrophy. This happens when you stop caring. When you give in to anxiety, depression and/or apathy. As long as you are willing to examine yourself and put your beliefs to the test I think that you will live a good life. If you decide, you’ve got all the answers and have solved all your problems, and it the rest of the world that needs to change, then you’ve set yourself on a path toward extinction. Learn from your mistakes, make yourself better, by whatever metric you value. Make your metrics better by examining the results. Make your tests better by comparing them to those you admire, or even those you disagree with. And examine your values regularly to make sure they still align with your goals, your community, your family, and make your decisions with your eyes open.
## Examine Your Life
If you aren’t looking at and thinking about your decisions and their consequences, you’re sure to fall short of your goals, alienate your peers, disappoint your family, and sometimes all at once. Luck can carry you for a time, but that's the trouble with luck, it’s only a matter of time before you roll snake-eyes. You have to be trying to learn more about yourself and the world around you if you are ever going to succeed in becoming a better person. If you are learning, you are growing, and if you are growing, than you can help others grow, and if we can all grow **out** instead of in any specific direction, then we’ll all be the better for it.
Remember that tree, trying to force the plant in any specific direction to the exclusion of all other with only stunt the growth as a whole.
